content/experience/_index.md, before:

+++
title = "Academic Employment | Dom Ford"
description = "Work history and previous roles."
template = "experience.html"
page_template = "page.html"
draft = false
render = true

[extra]
show_copyright = true
show_comments = false
show_shares = false
keywords = "experience,work,employment"
show_toc = false
show_date = false

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [Center for Digital Narrative](https://www.uib.no/en/cdn) & [LEAD AI](https://www.uib.no/en/leadai)
  
  [University of Bergen](https://www.uib.no/en)
"""
role = "Postdoctoral Research Fellow"
location = "Bergen, Norway"
start = "Oct 2025"
end = "Present"
summary = ""
details = [
  "LEAD AI programme (Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 101126560)",
  "Center for Digital Narrative (Centre of Excellence funded by the Norwegian Research Council and the University of Bergen – Project no. 332643)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [ZeMKI, Centre for Media, Communication and Information Research](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/) & [Institute for Religious Studies and Related Didactics](https://www.uni-bremen.de/en/religionswissenschaft/)
  
  [University of Bremen](https://www.uni-bremen.de/en/)
  """
role = "Postdoctoral Researcher"
location = "Bremen, Germany"
start = "Apr 2023"
end = "Sep 2025"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Managing editor for [*gamevironments*](https://journals.suub.uni-bremen.de/index.php/gamevironments/)",
  "Teacher, course manager and course designer for seminars in [BA Media and Communication Studies](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/studium/ba-kommunikations-und-medienwissenschaft/), [MA Media and Public Engagement](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/studies/m-a-media-and-public-engagement-2/) and [MA Digital Media and Society](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/studies/m-a-digital-media-and-society/)",
  "Classes: *Rituals in Digital Games* (Summer 2023 & 2024); *Comunity Formation in Digital Games* (Summer 2023 & 2024); *Play Design* (Winter 2023 & 2024, Summer 2024); *Communication, Media and Ethics in Digital Society* (Winter 2023 & 2024); *Digital Games and Community* (Winter 2024)",
  "Thesis and individual project supervisor and co-supervisor for BA and MA students"
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Assistant Lecturer"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Sep 2023"
end = "Jan 2024"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Games and Culture (15 ECTS)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [Center for Digital Play](https://digitalplay.itu.dk/)

  [IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)
  """
role = "PhD Fellow"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Aug 2019"
end = "Dec 2022"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Dissertation: [*Mytholudics: Understanding Games As/Through Myth*](https://pure.itu.dk/en/publications/mytholudics-understanding-games-asthrough-myth)",
  "Supervisor: [Hans-Joachim Løvind Backe](https://pure.itu.dk/en/persons/hans-joachim-l%C3%B8vind-backe/)",
  "Awarded with an [Elite Research Travel Grant](https://ufsn.dk/english/research-and-innovation/communicating-research/elite-research/) (*EliteForsk-rejsestipendium*, DKK 200,000, Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science)",
  "Teacher for classes in [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games)",
  "Classes: *Games and Culture* (Autumn 2020); *Advanced Topics in Game Studies* (Autumn 2021)"
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Teaching Assistant"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Feb 2019"
end = "Jun 2019"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Play Design (15 ECTS)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Teaching Assistant"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Sep 2018"
end = "Jan 2019"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Games and Culture (15 ECTS)",
]
+++

Commit message:

added education and new pub

content/experience/_index.md, after:

+++
title = "Academic Employment | Dom Ford"
description = "Work history and previous roles."
template = "experience.html"
page_template = "page.html"
draft = false
render = true

[extra]
show_copyright = true
show_comments = false
show_shares = false
keywords = "experience,work,employment"
show_toc = false
show_date = false

# Education cards
[[extra.education]]
degree = "PhD Game Studies"
institution = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
year = "2019–2022"
dissertation = "Dissertation: [*Mytholudics: Understanding Games As/Through Myth*](https://pure.itu.dk/en/publications/mytholudics-understanding-games-asthrough-myth), supervised by [Hans-Joachim Løvind Backe](https://pure.itu.dk/en/persons/hans-joachim-l%C3%B8vind-backe/)"

[[extra.education]]
degree = "MSc Game Design and Theory"
institution = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
year = "2017–2019"
dissertation = "Thesis: [*The Giant in Digital Roleplaying Games*](https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.32717.90089/2), supervised by [Espen Aarseth](https://www.scm.cityu.edu.hk/people/aarseth-espen)"

[[extra.education]]
degree = "MA English Literary Studies"
institution = "[University of Exeter](https://www.exeter.ac.uk/)"
year = "2015–2016"
dissertation = "Thesis: [*Gods from the Machine: Godhood and Morality in Roleplaying Videogames*](https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.29690.75206/1), supervised by [Debra Ramsay](https://experts.exeter.ac.uk/24813-debra-ramsay)"

[[extra.education]]
degree = "BA (Hons) English"
institution = "[University of Exeter](https://www.exeter.ac.uk/)"
year = "2012–2015"
dissertation = "Thesis: *Playing Arthurian Legend: The Arthurian Myth in Videogames*, supervised by [Pascale Aebischer](https://experts.exeter.ac.uk/1218-pascale-aebischer)"

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [Center for Digital Narrative](https://www.uib.no/en/cdn) & [LEAD AI](https://www.uib.no/en/leadai)
  
  [University of Bergen](http2-2015s://www.uib.no/en)
"""
role = "Postdoctoral Research Fellow"
location = "Bergen, Norway"
start = "Oct 2025"
end = "Present"
summary = ""
details = [
  "LEAD AI programme (Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 101126560)",
  "Center for Digital Narrative (Centre of Excellence funded by the Norwegian Research Council and the University of Bergen – Project no. 332643)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [ZeMKI, Centre for Media, Communication and Information Research](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/) & [Institute for Religious Studies and Related Didactics](https://www.uni-bremen.de/en/religionswissenschaft/)
  
  [University of Bremen](https://www.uni-bremen.de/en/)
  """
role = "Postdoctoral Researcher"
location = "Bremen, Germany"
start = "Apr 2023"
end = "Sep 2025"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Managing editor for [*gamevironments*](https://journals.suub.uni-bremen.de/index.php/gamevironments/)",
  "Teacher, course manager and course designer for seminars in [BA Media and Communication Studies](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/studium/ba-kommunikations-und-medienwissenschaft/), [MA Media and Public Engagement](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/studies/m-a-media-and-public-engagement-2/) and [MA Digital Media and Society](https://zemki.uni-bremen.de/en/studies/m-a-digital-media-and-society/)",
  "Classes: *Rituals in Digital Games* (Summer 2023 & 2024); *Comunity Formation in Digital Games* (Summer 2023 & 2024); *Play Design* (Winter 2023 & 2024, Summer 2024); *Communication, Media and Ethics in Digital Society* (Winter 2023 & 2024); *Digital Games and Community* (Winter 2024)",
  "Thesis and individual project supervisor and co-supervisor for BA and MA students"
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Assistant Lecturer"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Sep 2023"
end = "Jan 2024"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Games and Culture (15 ECTS)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = """
  [Center for Digital Play](https://digitalplay.itu.dk/)

  [IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)
  """
role = "PhD Fellow"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Aug 2019"
end = "Dec 2022"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Dissertation: [*Mytholudics: Understanding Games As/Through Myth*](https://pure.itu.dk/en/publications/mytholudics-understanding-games-asthrough-myth)",
  "Supervisor: [Hans-Joachim Løvind Backe](https://pure.itu.dk/en/persons/hans-joachim-l%C3%B8vind-backe/)",
  "Awarded with an [Elite Research Travel Grant](https://ufsn.dk/english/research-and-innovation/communicating-research/elite-research/) (*EliteForsk-rejsestipendium*, DKK 200,000, Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science)",
  "Teacher for classes in [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games)",
  "Classes: *Games and Culture* (Autumn 2020); *Advanced Topics in Game Studies* (Autumn 2021)"
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Teaching Assistant"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Feb 2019"
end = "Jun 2019"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Play Design (15 ECTS)",
]

[[extra.workplaces]]
organisation = "[IT University of Copenhagen](https://en.itu.dk/)"
role = "Teaching Assistant"
location = "Copenhagen, Denmark"
start = "Sep 2018"
end = "Jan 2019"
summary = ""
details = [
  "Teaching for [MSc Games](https://en.itu.dk/Programmes/MSc-Programmes/Games) class Games and Culture (15 ECTS)",
]
+++
